{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.22621}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9 THE 20 NOMINAL NAWALS\par
The nominal nawals, also know as day signs, day names, energies or archetypes of the Maya calendar, are the spiritual forces of nature that give all the beings a dynamic and oscillating personality.\par
\par
B'atz\par
(Thread / Monkey)\par
Nominal Nawals: 01 B'atz (Monkey or Thread)\par
Is the \lquote Thread\rquote , alluding to the \lquote Interweaving\rquote  of actions. the \lquote Node of Work and Ideas\rquote . like the connections we make in life, these threads are not simply straight cuts across, they can twist, \lquote Entangle\rquote  and change shape. B\rquote atz is the weaver moving the threads which resembles a \lquote Howler Monkey\rquote  swinging from trees. It\rquote s the spirit that \lquote Puts Things in Action\rquote , and is associated with arts and spirituality.\par
\par
E\par
(Pathfinder)\par
02 E\par
Is the \lquote Path of Life\rquote , the spirit of the \lquote Road\rquote  Like taking a trip to explore somewhere new or taking a trip inside of ourselves for \lquote Deep Insights\rquote . It\rquote s how we build purposes to \lquote Keep Moving\rquote  and how we create our \lquote Meaning of Life\rquote . It\rquote s also seen as The Nawal of \lquote Melancholy\rquote , and it\rquote s one of the 4 Mam (Grandfathers / Years)\par
\par
Aj\par
(Transformation)\par
03 Aj\par
Is the \lquote Transformation\rquote . It\rquote s the spirit of \lquote Changes\rquote  that come from the feeling of \lquote Incompleteness\rquote  or \lquote Instability\rquote . Like when it\rquote s necessary to adapt to a new situation, whether or not from our choices. When we change ideas or behaviour to make it suitable for a new situation. It\rquote s the unpleasant sensations that lead us to transform. Aj is also the \lquote Home\rquote .\par
\par
I'x B'alam\par
(Jaguar)\par
04 Ix Balam\par
Is the \lquote Female Jaguar\rquote . As the top hunter of the jungle that circles the territory and helps keep the environment and the food chain healthy and balanced. It\rquote s the aggressive side of the Feminine nature of the Earth. It\rquote s the spirit of \lquote Development\rquote  and \lquote Fertility\rquote , the \lquote Gestation\rquote , and it explains \lquote Materials\rquote  and financial abundance, like when we collect a \lquote Savings\rquote .\par
\par
Tz'ikin\par
(Eagle)\par
05 Tzikin\par
Is the \lquote Male Eagle\rquote  and the \lquote Mid-day Sun\rquote . It follows the metaphor of the Eagle that flies high, sees everything over large distances, and when it finds it\rquote s prey, goes \rquote Straightforward\rquote . It\rquote s the spirit of \lquote Engendering\rquote ,  and the masculine force of sky that gives rise. It\rquote s also related to \lquote Investments\rquote  or \lquote Spending\rquote .\par
\par
Ajmaq\par
(Complementarity)\par
06 Ajmaq\par
Is is the process of \lquote Matching\rquote , what joins  complementary opposites together. It can be a marriage, a partnership, or a business deal. It\rquote s also the results of matching. Ajmaq means \lquote Walking in Darkness\rquote  referring to the \lquote Blindness\rquote  caused by the emotions of matching. For example: \lquote Falling in Love\rquote . It\rquote s also the \lquote Procreation\rquote  cycle that connects parents, children, and grandparents.\par
\par
Na'oj\par
(Thoughts)\par
07 Noj\par
Is the \lquote Thought\rquote , or the \lquote Thinker\rquote , the intelligence that absorbs all the information. The process of \lquote Analysis and Synthesis\rquote . It \lquote Determines\rquote  and makes \lquote Decisions\rquote . Similar to the human mind, Na\rquote oj is the spirit that groups and compresses information into knowledge. It\rquote s like when we study something deep to learn, to find the patterns to memorise. Or like when we make \lquote Plans\rquote . It\rquote s also connected to \lquote Obsession\lquote  and It\rquote s one of the 4 Mam (Grandfathers/ Years).\par
\par
Tijax\par
(Cut)\par
08\par
Is the \lquote Cut\rquote , or the \lquote Incision\rquote . It represents the Obsidian and Flint stones used as scalpels to perform \rquote Healings\rquote , do Surgery, or to make weapons. Tijax means \lquote Cutting and Separating\rquote , like removing the \ldblquote negative\rdblquote  or what doesn\rquote t serve. The spirit of \lquote Medicine\rquote  and the gift of communication and miscommunication through language. It is words that can heal, or words that can \lquote Hurt\rquote ,  Tijax.\par
\par
Kawuq\par
(Sheet Lightning)\par
09 Kawuq\par
Is the spirit of \lquote Sheet Lightning\rquote , the \lquote Vision\rquote  beyond the senses. It\rquote s the instant knowing or access to an information without the processes of the mind. The \lquote Deep Intuition\rquote  that appears like sheet lightning. Lighting up an entire cloud base. Like when we can\rquote t explain, but we can see clearly how to do things. It also refers to unloading information, like when we \lquote Gossip\rquote .\par
\par
Junajpu\par
(Conqueror Sun)\par
10 Junajpu\par
Is the \lquote Conqueror Sun\rquote . The sun coming up from darkness and rising to \rquote Shine\rquote  again. It\rquote s the \ldblquote saga\rdblquote  of the seed that rises up from the underground until it blooms into a \lquote Flower\rquote . It\rquote s the spirit of the \lquote Battle to overcome darkness\rquote , like when we have face the inner battles we create, like overcoming a \lquote Fear\rquote  before starting something new. Something we do to \lquote Attract Attention\rquote  as flowers do.\par
\par
Imox\par
(Water)\par
11\par
Is the spirit of \lquote Water\rquote . It makes things \lquote Grow\rquote , the \lquote Injection of Force\rquote  that can be hard to control. It\rquote s also known as the \lquote Left hand\rquote , representing when we do things with the opposite hand, that may not have the same \lquote Precision\rquote . and it can \lquote Lead to Madness\rquote , The \lquote Overflow\rquote  that can destroy things. Like when we mess something up.\par
\par
Iq'\par
(Wind)\par
12 Iq\par
Is the spirit of the \lquote Wind\rquote . It\rquote s the \lquote Breath of Life\rquote . The wind working as an \lquote Inhalation an Impulse\rquote . It fills us with \lquote Courage\rquote  or \lquote Enthusiasm\rquote , and could lead us to see life in a more romanticised perspective. It\rquote s an \lquote Explosive\rquote  Nawal, like an unstoppable child throwing the \rquote Temper Tantrum\rquote  when things don\rquote t go their way, look out! It\rquote s also one of the 4 Mam (Grandfathers / Years).\par
\par
Aq'ab'al\par
(Clarity)\par
13 Aqabal\par
Is the \lquote Clarity\rquote . The first rays of the sun that start lighting up what is in the dark, but It\rquote s not day yet. It\rquote s about shining a light onto what is in darkness, as a flashlight does. like when we do a \lquote Research\rquote  to learn about something specific to \rquote Clarify\rquote  it more. It\rquote s the spirit of the Jaguar hunting in the dark and that chooses what shall remain in the dark. It\rquote s \lquote The Power Obtained by Hiding Information\rquote . The Nawal of \lquote Control\rquote .\par
\par
K'at\par
(Burning into Ashes)\par
14 Kat\par
It\rquote s the \lquote Embers\rquote  after \lquote burning something to ashes\rquote . The fire that already consumed most of the fuel and is burning low. It\rquote s the \lquote Sacrifices we do for Others\rquote . The Burning of energy to help others or to keep our projects or business continue. It\rquote s the \lquote Effort\rquote  or the \rquote Tasks\rquote  that sometimes can leave us \lquote Exhausted\rquote . It\rquote s also known as the \lquote Net\rquote  referring to the ones used to carry fish and other food, so others will eat as well. It can be the bag we carry our tools for work or that we use shopping for groceries.\par
\par
Kan\par
(Stellar Serpent)\par
15 Kan\par
Is the \lquote Stellar Serpent\rquote , due to the shape of lightning bolts that looks like serpents in the sky. But actually it\rquote s more connected to the sound of thunder announcing the rain. It\rquote s the spirit of \lquote Intervention\rquote , or the \lquote Fury\rquote  in the sky. It\rquote s like the feeling of \lquote Annoyance\rquote  that lead us to intervene in a situation, wether it\rquote s on our own or in the behalf of someone else. For example as lawyers do. It can also express the \lquote Enemy\rquote .\par
\par
Kame\par
(Ancestors)\par
16 Kame\par
Is the \lquote Death\rquote . It\rquote s the spirit of the \lquote Ancestors\rquote  that still travels through the breezes of the wind. It\rquote s the day used to honour our dead ancestors, to keep \ldblquote feeding\rdblquote  them. It\rquote s the most sensitive Nawal and it deals with emotional vulnerability, Like when we feel \lquote A Broken Heart\rquote  \lquote Left Out\rquote  or \lquote Oppression and Sorrow\rquote . It\rquote s The really dark places inside of us that we are stuck in sometimes. But this realm of Kame is what can give birth to the most beautiful and touching melodies of life, and also deep authentic empathy and \lquote Supportive\rquote  attitudes.\par
\par
Kej\par
(Deer)\par
17 Kej\par
Is the \lquote Deer\rquote  and the \lquote Altar\rquote . It\rquote s the spirit of \lquote Strength\rquote  and \lquote Stability\rquote , and it is the symbol of the spiritual guides. The ones who are  responsible to keep the community in \lquote Balance\rquote . Another representation of the deer is the 4 legged table used in the Maya altars. Kej can also be connected to a \lquote Horse\rquote  or a \lquote Moose\rquote  to express it\rquote s wild, strong, \lquote Protective\rquote  and sometimes \rquote Reluctant\rquote   nature that tends to \lquote Dominate\rquote  and \lquote Ride\rquote  to set the rules. It\rquote s one of the 4 Mam (Grandfathers, Years).\par
\par
Q'anil\par
(Seed)\par
18 Qanil\par
Is the \lquote Seed\rquote , The \lquote Potential to Germinate\rquote   and the spirit of \lquote Multiplication\rquote . Like a seed that needs fertile soil, water, oxygen, proper temperature and amount of light and darkness to germinate, Q\rquote anil refers to the \lquote Proportions\rquote  in which things are applied from the process of \rquote Sowing\rquote  and \lquote Growth\rquote , to \lquote Yellowing\rquote  and \lquote Harvesting\rquote . It\rquote s also related to the abuse of medicines, addictions. Like when a plant or seed gets \lquote Rotten\rquote  or \rquote Intoxicated\rquote . Q\rquote anil is also the Nawal of Venus.\par
\par
Toj\par
(Fire)\par
19 Toj\par
Is the spirit of the \lquote Fire\rquote  ascending, going wild, growing, being fed as \lquote Payment\rquote . It\rquote s related to the \lquote Offerings\rquote  made to the ceremonial fire as a \lquote Taxation\rquote  or a way to \lquote Pay\rquote . It\rquote s also connected to the blood, in a sense of paying \ldblquote blood, sweat and tears\rdblquote  to get something. The \lquote Sacrifices We Do To Achieve Power\rquote , like spending years paying a mortgage, or working hard to get a promotion, or the \lquote Reward\rquote  of seeing our business\rquote  succeed. It can cost us everything, mental and physical health included, but at the end is ours. It\rquote s about paying to \lquote Rule\rquote  and at the same time having to deal with the large amount of pressure that comes along with it. It also connected to \lquote Pain\rquote  and \rquote Sickness\rquote .\par
\par
Tz'i'\par
(Dog)\par
20 Tzi\par
Is the \lquote Mountain Dog\rquote , the spirit associated with \lquote Emotional Attachment\rquote . It can be related to the bonds we create in life with others and how we express our \lquote Loyalty\rquote  and \rquote Friendship\rquote , How we deal with the unstable nature of \lquote Emotions\rquote  that often brings \rquote Uncertainty\rquote  and \lquote Doubts\rquote . It also is expressed as \ldblquote To walk like a Dog behind someone\rdblquote  as a way to refer to \lquote Sexual Attachment\rquote , \lquote Seduction\rquote  or simply \lquote Begging\rquote  for affection. It also  describes the \lquote Chaos\rquote  caused by emotional disorders that can lead Tz\rquote i\rquote  to be the \lquote Authority that Bites\rquote\par
\par
\par
THE 13 NUMERAL NAWALS\par
Numeral Nawals, commonly described as Tones or deities, are the spiritual forces of nature that give all beings a constant impulse. They are explained through 13 metaphors of the water:\par
\par
1 (Jun)\par
01 Jun\par
Is the Nawal of \lquote Fresh Start\rquote , like the a spring of water that gently breaks the skin of the Earth.\par
\par
2 (Keb')\par
02 Kieb\par
Is the Nawal of \lquote Retraction\rquote , like when the tide is \lquote Pulling Back\rquote .\par
\par
3 (Oxib')\par
03\par
Is the Nawal of \lquote Divergence\rquote , like a River Delta. The water that \lquote Opens the Path\rquote .\par
\par
4 (Kajib')\par
04 Kahib\par
Is the Nawal of \lquote Containment\rquote , like a dam or a water well. The water that slowly \lquote Gains Strength\rquote .\par
\par
5 (Job')\par
05 Job\par
Is the Nawal of \lquote Roughness\rquote , like a Tsunami or when the dam breaks. The water that \lquote Overflows\rquote .\par
\par
6 (Wakib')\par
06 Wakib\par
Is the Nawal of \lquote Pondering\rquote , a dry cave as the place \lquote To Weigh\rquote  thoughts.\par
\par
7 (Wukub')\par
07 Wukub\par
Is the Nawal of \lquote Intensity\rquote , the hot liquid like a geyser or a lava. The \lquote Manifest\rquote .\par
\par
8 (Wajxaqib')\par
08\par
Is the Nawal of the \lquote Return\rquote , like the rainy season. The re-start in nature and it\rquote s \lquote Patterns\rquote .\par
\par
9 (Belejeb')\par
09 Belejeb\par
Is the Nawal of \lquote Gestation\rquote , what is \rquote Hidden from Sight\rquote , Like the underground rivers.\par
\par
10 (Lajuj)\par
10 Lajuj\par
Is the Nawal of \lquote Convergence\rquote , like when rivers or water streams meet in a lake. \lquote Everything Coming Together\rquote .\par
\par
11 (Ju'lajuj)\par
11 Junlajuj\par
Is the Nawal of \lquote Scattering\rquote , like the splash of water that \rquote Spreads\rquote  in various random directions.\par
\par
12 (Kab'lajuj)\par
12 Kablajuj\par
Is the Nawal of \lquote The Unexpected\rquote , like a downpour, a flood, or a creation of new bodies of water. It\rquote s the \lquote Additional\rquote .\par
\par
13 (Oxlajuj)\par
13\par
Is the Nawal of \lquote Accumulation\rquote  of water, the \lquote Biggest\rquote , like the ocean.\par
}
 